<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>The letter was a word of warning; it informed him that the Doctor had come home more impracticable than ever. She might have reflected that Catherine would supply him with all the information he needed on this point; but we know that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman‚Äôs reflections were rarely just; and, moreover, she felt that it was not for her to depend on what Catherine might do. She was to do her duty, quite irrespective of Catherine. I have said that her young friend took his ease with her, and it is an illustration of the fact that he made no answer to her letter. He took note of it, amply; but he lighted his cigar with it, and he waited, in tranquil confidence that he should receive another. ‚ÄúHis state of mind really freezes my blood,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman had written, alluding to her brother; and it would have seemed that upon this statement she could hardly improve. Nevertheless, she wrote again, expressing herself with the aid of a different figure. ‚ÄúHis hatred of you burns with a lurid flame‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe flame that never dies,‚Äù she wrote. ‚ÄúBut it doesn‚Äôt light up the darkness of your future. If my affection could do so, all the years of your life would be an eternal sunshine. I can extract nothing from <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr>; she is so terribly secretive, like her father. She seems to expect to be married very soon, and has evidently made preparations in Europe‚ÅÝ‚Äîquantities of clothing, ten pairs of shoes, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> My dear friend, you cannot set up in married life simply with a few pairs of shoes, can you? Tell me what you think of this. I am intensely anxious to see you; I have so much to say. I miss you dreadfully; the house seems so empty without you. What is the news down town? Is the business extending? That dear little business‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think it‚Äôs so brave of you! Couldn‚Äôt I come to your office?‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust for three minutes? I might pass for a customer‚ÅÝ‚Äîis that what you call them? I might come in to buy something‚ÅÝ‚Äîsome shares or some railroad things. <em>Tell me what you think of this plan.</em> I would carry a little reticule, like a woman of the people.‚Äù</p>
			<p>In spite of the suggestion about the reticule, Morris appeared to think poorly of the plan, for he gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman no encouragement whatever to visit his office, which he had already represented to her as a place peculiarly and unnaturally difficult to find. But as she persisted in desiring an interview‚ÅÝ‚Äîup to the last, after months of intimate colloquy, she called these meetings ‚Äúinterviews‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe agreed that they should take a walk together, and was even kind enough to leave his office for this purpose, during the hours at which business might have been supposed to be liveliest. It was no surprise to him, when they met at a street corner, in a region of empty lots and undeveloped pavements (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman being attired as much as possible like a ‚Äúwoman of the people‚Äù), to find that, in spite of her urgency, what she chiefly had to convey to him was the assurance of her sympathy. Of such assurances, however, he had already a voluminous collection, and it would not have been worth his while to forsake a fruitful avocation merely to hear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman say, for the thousandth time, that she had made his cause her own. Morris had something of his own to say. It was not an easy thing to bring out, and while he turned it over the difficulty made him acrimonious.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh yes, I know perfectly that he combines the properties of a lump of ice and a red-hot coal,‚Äù he observed. ‚ÄúCatherine has made it thoroughly clear, and you have told me so till I am sick of it. You needn‚Äôt tell me again; I am perfectly satisfied. He will never give us a penny; I regard that as mathematically proved.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman at this point had an inspiration.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCouldn‚Äôt you bring a lawsuit against him?‚Äù She wondered that this simple expedient had never occurred to her before.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will bring a lawsuit against <em>you</em>,‚Äù said Morris, ‚Äúif you ask me any more such aggravating questions. A man should know when he is beaten,‚Äù he added, in a moment. ‚ÄúI must give her up!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman received this declaration in silence, though it made her heart beat a little. It found her by no means unprepared, for she had accustomed herself to the thought that, if Morris should decidedly not be able to get her brother‚Äôs money, it would not do for him to marry Catherine without it. ‚ÄúIt would not do‚Äù was a vague way of putting the thing; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman‚Äôs natural affection completed the idea, which, though it had not as yet been so crudely expressed between them as in the form that Morris had just given it, had nevertheless been implied so often, in certain easy intervals of talk, as he sat stretching his legs in the Doctor‚Äôs well-stuffed armchairs, that she had grown first to regard it with an emotion which she flattered herself was philosophic, and then to have a secret tenderness for it. The fact that she kept her tenderness secret proves, of course, that she was ashamed of it; but she managed to blink her shame by reminding herself that she was, after all, the official protector of her niece‚Äôs marriage. Her logic would scarcely have passed muster with the Doctor. In the first place, Morris <em>must</em> get the money, and she would help him to it. In the second, it was plain it would never come to him, and it would be a grievous pity he should marry without it‚ÅÝ‚Äîa young man who might so easily find something better. After her brother had delivered himself, on his return from Europe, of that incisive little address that has been quoted, Morris‚Äôs cause seemed so hopeless that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman fixed her attention exclusively upon the latter branch of her argument. If Morris had been her son, she would certainly have sacrificed Catherine to a superior conception of his future; and to be ready to do so as the case stood was therefore even a finer degree of devotion. Nevertheless, it checked her breath a little to have the sacrificial knife, as it were, suddenly thrust into her hand.</p>
			<p>Morris walked along a moment, and then he repeated harshly: ‚ÄúI must give her up!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI think I understand you,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman gently.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI certainly say it distinctly enough‚ÅÝ‚Äîbrutally and vulgarly enough.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He was ashamed of himself, and his shame was uncomfortable; and as he was extremely intolerant of discomfort, he felt vicious and cruel. He wanted to abuse somebody, and he began, cautiously‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor he was always cautious‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith himself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCouldn‚Äôt you take her down a little?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTake her down?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPrepare her‚ÅÝ‚Äîtry and ease me off.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman stopped, looking at him very solemnly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy poor Morris, do you know how much she loves you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I don‚Äôt. I don‚Äôt want to know. I have always tried to keep from knowing. It would be too painful.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe will suffer much,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou must console her. If you are as good a friend to me as you pretend to be, you will manage it.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman shook her head sadly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou talk of my ‚Äòpretending‚Äô to like you; but I can‚Äôt pretend to hate you. I can only tell her I think very highly of you; and how will that console her for losing you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe Doctor will help you. He will be delighted at the thing being broken off, and, as he is a knowing fellow, he will invent something to comfort her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe will invent a new torture!‚Äù cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman. ‚ÄúHeaven deliver her from her father‚Äôs comfort. It will consist of his crowing over her and saying, ‚ÄòI always told you so!‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>Morris coloured a most uncomfortable red.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you don‚Äôt console her any better than you console me, you certainly won‚Äôt be of much use! It‚Äôs a damned disagreeable necessity; I feel it extremely, and you ought to make it easy for me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will be your friend for life!‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman declared.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBe my friend <em>now</em>!‚Äù And Morris walked on.</p>
			<p>She went with him; she was almost trembling.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShould you like me to tell her?‚Äù she asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou mustn‚Äôt tell her, but you can‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou can‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù And he hesitated, trying to think what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman could do. ‚ÄúYou can explain to her why it is. It‚Äôs because I can‚Äôt bring myself to step in between her and her father‚ÅÝ‚Äîto give him the pretext he grasps at‚ÅÝ‚Äîso eagerly (it‚Äôs a hideous sight) for depriving her of her rights.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman felt with remarkable promptitude the charm of this formula.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs so like you,‚Äù she said; ‚Äúit‚Äôs so finely felt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Morris gave his stick an angry swing.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, botheration!‚Äù he exclaimed perversely.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman, however, was not discouraged.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt may turn out better than you think. Catherine is, after all, so very peculiar.‚Äù And she thought she might take it upon herself to assure him that, whatever happened, the girl would be very quiet‚ÅÝ‚Äîshe wouldn‚Äôt make a noise. They extended their walk, and, while they proceeded, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman took upon herself other things besides, and ended by having assumed a considerable burden; Morris being ready enough, as may be imagined, to put everything off upon her. But he was not for a single instant the dupe of her blundering alacrity; he knew that of what she promised she was competent to perform but an insignificant fraction, and the more she professed her willingness to serve him, the greater fool he thought her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat will you do if you don‚Äôt marry her?‚Äù she ventured to inquire in the course of this conversation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSomething brilliant,‚Äù said Morris. ‚ÄúShouldn‚Äôt you like me to do something brilliant?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The idea gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman exceeding pleasure.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shall feel sadly taken in if you don‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI shall have to, to make up for this. This isn‚Äôt at all brilliant, you know.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman mused a little, as if there might be some way of making out that it was; but she had to give up the attempt, and, to carry off the awkwardness of failure, she risked a new inquiry.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you mean‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you mean another marriage?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Morris greeted this question with a reflection which was hardly the less impudent from being inaudible. ‚ÄúSurely, women are more crude than men!‚Äù And then he answered audibly:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever in the world!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman felt disappointed and snubbed, and she relieved herself in a little vaguely-sarcastic cry. He was certainly perverse.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI give her up, not for another woman, but for a wider career!‚Äù Morris announced.</p>
			<p>This was very grand; but still <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPenniman, who felt that she had exposed herself, was faintly rancorous.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you mean never to come to see her again?‚Äù she asked, with some sharpness.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh no, I shall come again; but what is the use of dragging it out? I have been four times since she came back, and it‚Äôs terribly awkward work. I can‚Äôt keep it up indefinitely; she oughtn‚Äôt to expect that, you know. A woman should never keep a man dangling!‚Äù he added finely.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh, but you must have your last parting!‚Äù urged his companion, in whose imagination the idea of last partings occupied a place inferior in dignity only to that of first meetings.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
